chapter one integration now the
teachings of yoga yoga is to still the
patterning of consciousness then pure
awareness can abide in its very nature
otherwise awareness takes itself to be
the patterns of consciousness there are
five types of patterns including both
hurtful and benign they are right
perception misperception
conceptualization deep sleep and
remembering right perception arises from
direct observation inference all the
words of others misperception is false
knowledge not based on what actually is
conceptualization derives from
linguistic knowledge not contact with
real things deep sleep is a patterned
grounded in the perception that nothing
exists remembering is the retention of
experiences both practice and
non-reaction are required to still the
patterning of consciousness practice is
the sustained effort to rest in that
stillness and this practice becomes
firmly rooted when it is cultivated
skilfully and continuously for a long
time as for non-reaction
one can recognize that it has been fully
achieved when no attachment arises in
regard to anything at all whether
perceived directly or earned when the
ultimate level of non-reaction has been
reached purely awareness can clearly see
itself as independent from the
fundamental qualities of nature at first
the stilling process is accompanied by
four kinds of cognition analytical
thinking insight bliss or feeling like
yourself later after one practices
steadily to bring all thought to a
standstill these four kinds of cognition
fall away leaving only a store of latent
impressions in the depth memory once the
body is gone and these latent
impressions are dissolved in nature they
are inclined to be reborn for all others
faith energy mindfulness integration and
wisdom form the path to realization for
those who seek liberation wholeheartedly
realization is near how near depends on
whether the practice is mild moderate or
intense realization may also come if one
is oriented toward the ideal of pure
awareness Ishwara ishvara is a distinct
incorruptible form of pure awareness
utterly independent of cause and effect
and lacking any store of latent
impressions its independence makes this
awareness an incomparable source of
omniscience existing beyond time ishvara
was also the ideal of the Ancients
ishvara is represented by a sound o
through repetition its meaning becomes
clear then interiorization develops and
obstacles fall away sickness apathy
doubt carelessness laziness hedonism
delusion lack of progress and
inconstancy are all distractions which
by stirring up consciousness act as
barriers to stillness when they do one
may experience distress depression or
the inability to maintain steadiness of
posture or breathing one can subdue
these distractions by working with any
one of the following principles of
practice consciousness settles as one
radiates friendliness compassion delight
and equanimity toward all things whether
pleasant or painful good or bad or by
pausing after breath flows in or out or
by steadily observing as new sensations
materialize or when experiencing
thoughts that are luminous and free of
sorrow or by focusing on things that do
not inspire attachment or by reflecting
on insights culled from sleep and
dreaming or through meditative
absorption in any desired object one can
become fully absorbed in any object
whether vast or infinitesimal as the
patterning of consciousness subsides a
transparent way of seeing called
coalescence saturates consciousness like
a jewel it reflects equally whatever
lies before it whether subject object or
act of perceiving so long as conceptual
or linguistic knowledge pervades this
transparency it is called coalescence
with thought at the next stage called
coalescence beyond thought objects cease
to be colored by memory now formless
only the essential nature shines forth
in the same way coalesced contemplation
of subtle objects is described as
reflective or reflection free subtle
objects can be traced back to their
origin
undifferentiated nature these four kinds
of coalescence with thought beyond
thought
reflective reflection free are called
integration that bears seeds of latent
impressions in the lucidity of coalesced
reflection free contemplation the nature
of the self becomes clear the wisdom
that arises in that lucidity is unerring
and like insights acquired through
influence or teachings this wisdom has
as its object the actual distinction
between pure awareness and consciousness
it generates latent impressions that
prevent the activation of other
impressions when even these ceased to
arise and the patterning of
consciousness is completely stilled
integration there's no further seeds
chapter 2 the path to realization yogic
action has three components discipline
self study and orientation toward the
ideal of pure awareness its purposes are
to disarm the causes of suffering and
achieve integration the causes of
suffering are not seeing things as they
are the sense of I attachment aversion
and clinging to life not seeing things
as they are is the field where the other
causes of suffering germinate whether
dormant activated intercepted or
weakened lacking this wisdom one
mistakes that which is impermanent
impure distressing or empty of self the
permanence purity happiness and self the
sense of I ascribe stealth hood to pure
awareness by our identifying it with the
senses attachment is a residue of
pleasant experience a version is a
residue of suffering clinging to life is
instinctive and self-perpetuating even
for the wise in their subtle form these
causes of suffering are subdued by
seeing where they come from in their
gross form as patterns of consciousness
they are subdued through meditative
absorption the causes of suffering are
the root source of actions each action
deposits latent impressions deep in the
mind to be activated and experienced
later in this birth or lie hidden
awaiting a future one so long as this
root source exists its contents will
arrive on into a birth a life and
experience this life will be marked by
delight or anguish in proportion to
those good or bad actions that created
its store of latent impressions the wise
see suffering in all experience whether
from the anguish of impermanence or from
latent impressions laden with suffering
or from incessant conflict as the
fundamental qualities of nature vie for
ascendancy but suffering that has not
yet arisen can be prevented the
preventable cause of all this suffering
is the apparent indivisibility of pure
awareness and what it regards what
awareness regards namely the phenomenal
world embodies the qualities of
luminosity activity and inertia it
includes oneself composed of both
elements and the senses
it is the ground for both sensual
experience and liberation all orders of
being undifferentiated differentiated in
distinct distinct are manifestations of
the fundamental qualities of nature
purely awareness is just seeing itself
although pure it usually appears to
operate through the perceiving mind in
essence the phenomenal world exists to
reveal this truth once that happens the
phenomenal world no longer appears as
such it continues to exist as a common
reality for everyone else though it is
by virtue of the apparent indivisibility
of the phenomenal world and pure
awareness that the former seems to
possess the latter's powers not seeing
things as they are is the cause of this
phenomenon with realization the
appearance of indivisibility vanishes
revealing that awareness is free and
untouched by phenomena the apparent
indivisibility of seeing and the seen
can be eradicated by cultivating
uninterrupted discrimination between
awareness and what it regards at the
ultimate level of discrimination wisdom
extends to all seven aspects of nature
when the components of yoga are
practiced impurities dwindle then the
light of understanding can shine forth
illuminating the way to discriminative
awareness the eight components of yoga
are external discipline internal
discipline posture breath regulation
concentration meditative absorption and
integration the five external
disciplines are not harming truthfulness
not stealing celibacy and not being
acquisitive these universals
transcending birth place era or
circumstance constitute the great vow of
yoga the five internal disciplines a
bodily purification contentment
intensity self study and orientation
toward the ideal of pure awareness and
wholesome thoughts can be utilized by
cultivating wholesome ones we ourselves
may act upon unwholesome thoughts such
as wanting to harm someone or we may
cause or condone them in others and
wholesome thoughts may arise from greed
anger ought illusion they may be mild
moderate or extreme
they never cease to ripen into ignorance
and suffering this is why one must
cultivate wholesome thoughts being
firmly grounded in non-violence creates
an atmosphere in which others can let go
of their hostility for those grounded in
truthfulness every action and its
consequences are imbued with truth for
those who have no inclination to steal
the truly precious is at hand the chaste
acquire vitality freedom from wanting
unlocks the real purpose of existence
with bodily purification one's body
ceases to be compelling
likewise contact with others
purification also brings about clarity
happiness concentration mastery of the
senses and capacity for self-awareness
contentment brings unsurpassed joy as
intense discipline burns up impurities
the body and its senses become supremely
refined self-study deepens communion
with one's personal deity through
orientation toward the ideal of pure
awareness one can achieve integration
the postures of meditation should embody
steadiness and ease this occurs is all
effort relaxes and coalescence arises
revealing that the body and the infinite
universe are indivisible then one is no
longer disturbed by the play of
opposites with effort relaxing the flow
of inhalation and exhalation can be
brought to a standstill this is called
breath regulation as the movement
patterns of each breath inhalation
exhalation the Lao are observed as the
duration number and area of focus breath
becomes spacious and subtle as
realization Dawn's the distinction
between breathing in and out falls away
then the veil lifts from the minds
luminosity and the minds potential for
concentration is realized when
consciousness interior Isis by
uncoupling from external objects the
senses do likewise this is called
withdrawal of the senses then the senses
reside out early in the service of
realization
Chapter three the extraordinary powers
concentration locks consciousness on a
single area in meditative absorption the
entire perceptual flow is aligned with
that object when only the essential
nature of the object shines forth as if
formless integration has arisen
concentration meditative absorption and
integration regarding a single object
comprised the perfect discipline of
consciousness once the perfect
discipline of consciousness is mastered
wisdom Dawn's perfect discipline is
mastered in stages these three
components concentration absorption and
integration are more interiorized than
the preceding five even these three are
external to integration that bears no
seeds the transformation toward total
stillness occurs as new latent
impressions fostering cessation arise to
prevent the activation of distractive
stored ones and moments of stillness
begin to permeate consciousness these
latent impressions help consciousness
flow from one tranquil moment to the
next
consciousness is transformed toward
integration as distractions dwindle and
focus arises in other words
consciousness is transformed toward
focus as continuity develops between
arising and subsiding perceptions
consciousness evolves along the same
three lines form time span and condition
as the elements in the senses the
substrate is unchanged whether before
during or after it takes a given form
these transformations appear to unfurl
of the way they do because consciousness
is a succession of distinct patterns
observing these three axes of change
form time span and condition with
perfect discipline yields insight into
the past and future word meaning and
perception tend to get bumped together
each confused with the others
focusing on the distinctions between
them with perfect discipline yields
insight into the language of all beings
directly observing latent impressions
with perfect discipline yields insight
into previous births focusing with
perfect discipline on the perceptions of
another yields insight into an act
person's consciousness but not insight
regarding the object of those
perceptions since the object itself is
not actually present in that person's
consciousness when the bodies form is
observed with perfect discipline it
becomes invisible the eye is disengaged
from incoming light and the power to
perceive is suspended
likewise through perfect discipline
other percepts sound smell taste touch
can be made to disappear the effects of
action may be immediate or slow incoming
observing one's actions with perfect
discipline or studying immense yields
insight into death focusing with perfect
discipline on friendliness compassion
delight and equanimity one is imbued
with their energies focusing with
perfect discipline on the powers of an
elephant or other entities one acquires
those powers being absorbed in the play
of the minds luminosity yields insight
about the subtle hidden and distant
focusing with perfect discipline on the
son yields insight about the universe
moon yields insight about the Stars
positions focusing with perfect
discipline on the polystar yields
insight about their movements focusing
with perfect discipline on the navel
Energy Center yields insight about the
organization of the body focusing with
perfect discipline on the pit of the
throat eradicate hunger and thirst
focusing with perfect discipline on The
Tortoise channel one cultivates
steadiness focusing with perfect
discipline on the light in the crown of
the head one acquires the perspective of
the perfected ones or all these
accomplishments may be realized in a
flash of spontaneous illumination
focusing with perfect discipline on the
heart one understands the nature of
consciousness experience consists of
perceptions in which the luminous aspect
of the phenomenal world is mistaken for
absurd
the pure awareness focusing with perfect
discipline on the different properties
of each yields insight into the nature
of pure awareness following this insight
the senses hearing feeling seeing
tasting smelling may suddenly be
enhanced these sensory gifts may feel
like attainments but they distract one
from integration by relaxing one's
attachment to the body and becoming
profoundly sensitive to its currents
consciousness can enter another's body
by mastering the flow of energy in the
head and neck one can walk through water
mud thorns and other obstacles without
touching down but rather floating over
them by mastering the flow of energy
through the solar plexus one becomes
radiant by focusing with perfect
discipline on the way sound travels
through the ether one acquires divine
hearing by focusing with perfect
discipline on the body's relationship to
the ether and developing coalesced
contemplation on the lightness of cotton
one can travel through space when
consciousness completely disengages from
externals the great disembodiment then
the veil lifts from the minds luminosity
by observing the aspects of matter gross
subtle intrinsic relational purposive
with perfect discipline one masters the
elements then extraordinary faculties
appear including the power to shrink to
the size of an atom as the body attains
perfection transcending physical law
this perfection includes beauty grace
strength and the durability of a diamond
by observing the various aspects of the
sense organs their processes of
perception intrinsic nature's
identification of self
interconnectedness purposes with perfect
discipline one masters them then free
from the constraints of their organs the
senses perceive with the quickness of
the mind no longer in the sway of the
phenomenal world once one just sees the
distinction between pure awareness and
the luminous aspect of the phenomenal
world all conditions are known and
mastered when one is unattached even to
this omniscience and mastery the seeds
of suffering wither and pure awareness
knows it stands alone even if the
exhorted beckon
one must avoid attachment and pride or
suffering will recur focusing with
perfect discipline on the succession of
moments in time yields insight born of
discrimination this insight allows one
to tell things apart which through
similarities of origin feature or
position had seemed continuous in this
way discriminative insight deconstructs
all of the phenomenal world's objects
and conditions setting them apart from
pure awareness
once the luminosity and transparency of
consciousness have become as distilled
as pure awareness they can reflect the
freedom of awareness back to itself
chapter for freedom the attainments
brought about by integration may also
arise at birth through the use of herbs
from intonation or through austerity
being delivered into a new form comes
about when natural forces overflow the
transformation into this form or that is
not driven by the causes proximate to it
just oriented by them the way a farmer
diverts a stream for irrigation feeling
like herself is the frame that Orient's
consciousness toward individuation a
succession of consciousnesses generating
a vast array of distinctive perceptions
appear to consolidate into one
individual consciousness once
consciousness is fixed in meditative
absorption it no longer contributes to
the store of latent impressions the
actions of a realized yogi transcend
good and evil whereas the actions of
others may be good or evil or both each
action comes to fruition by coloring
latent impressions according to its
quality good evil or both because the
depth memory and its latent impressions
are in a piece their dynamic of cause
and effect flows uninterruptedly across
the demarcation zuv birth place and time
they have always existed because the
will to exist is eternal since its cause
effect basis and object are inseparable
a latent impression disappears when they
do the past and future are imminent in
an object existing as different sexes in
the same flow of exponential substances
the characteristics of these sectors
whether manifest or subtle are imparted
by the fundamental qualities of nature
their transformations tend to blur
together imbuing each new object with
the quality of substantiality people
perceive the same object differently as
each person's perception follows a
separate path from another's but the
object is not dependent on either of
those perceptions if it were what would
happen to it when nobody was looking an
object is only known by a consciousness
it is colored otherwise it is not known
patterns of consciousness are always
known by pure awareness their ultimate
unchanging witness consciousness is seen
not by its own light but by awareness
furthermore consciousness and its object
cannot be perceived that once if
consciousness were perceived by itself
instead of awareness the chain of such
perceptions would regress infinitely
imploding memory once it is stilled
though consciousness mirrors unchanging
pure awareness and can reflect itself
being perceived then consciousness can
be colored by both pure awareness and
the phenomenal world thereby fulfilling
all its purposes even when colored by
countless latent traits consciousness
like all compound phenomena has another
purpose to serve awareness as soon as
one can distinguish between
consciousness and awareness the ongoing
construction of the self ceases
consciousness now oriented to this
distinction can gravitate toward freedom
the fully integrated knowledge that pure
awareness is independent from nature
any gaps in discriminating awareness
allow distracting thoughts to emerge
from the store of latent impressions
these distractions can be subdued as the
causes of suffering were by tracing them
back to their origin or through
meditative absorption one who regards
even the most exalted states
disinterestedly discriminating
continuously between pure awareness and
the phenomenal world enters the final
stage of integration in which nature is
seen to be a cloud of irreducible
exponential substances this realization
extinguishes both the causes of
suffering and the cycle of cause and
effect once all the layers and
imperfections concealing truth have been
washed away insight is boundless with
little left to know then the seamless
flow of reality its transformations
colored by the fundamental qualities
begins to break down fulfilling the true
mission of consciousness one can see
that the flow is actually a series of
discrete events each corresponding to
the merest instant of time in which one
form becomes another freedom is at hand
when the fundamental qualities of nature
each of their transformations witnessed
at the moment of its inception are
recognized as irrelevant to pure
awareness it stands alone grounded in
its very nature the power of pure seeing
that is all